Principles for testing CumulusCI. (#3327)
SFDO-Tooling/CumulusCI: docs/testing-principles.md

# Principles for Testing the Cumulus Framework and Snowfakery

> 

Reviewer: Also not a bad idea to have a sentence or two here.

## Goals

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Here are the goals for testing:

```

> 1. tests should execute code paths as similar to end-user code as possible (fidelity)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Tests should execute code paths as similar to end-user code as possible (fidelity)
```

> 2. tests should run as fast as possible (velocity)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Tests should run as fast as possible (velocity)
```

> 3. tests should run properly even when third-party services are down or unavailable (availability)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Tests should run properly even when third-party services are down or unavailable (availability)
```

> Thus, mocking/faking should be used sparingly (as they work against

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Mocking and faking work against the goal of fidelity, so only 
```

> the goal of fidelity) and should only to deal with challenges

Reviewer: ```suggestion
use them when necessary to deal with challenges of velocity and availability.
```

> of velocity and availability.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

## VCR for the easy cases

> For simple cases, a transformation to use VCR allows all three goals to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For simple cases, a transformation to use VCR helps achieve
```

> be simultaneously achieved. Now that we have VCR, we can take a test like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
all three goals. Now that we have VCR, we can take a test like this:
```

```python
class TestLicensePreflights:
    def test_license_preflight(self):
        task = create_task(GetAvailableLicenses, {})
        task._init_api = Mock()
        task._init_api.return_value.query.return_value = {
            "totalSize": 2,
            "records": [
                {"LicenseDefinitionKey": "TEST1"},
                {"LicenseDefinitionKey": "TEST2"},
            ],
        }
        task()

        task._init_api.return_value.query.assert_called_once_with(
            "SELECT LicenseDefinitionKey FROM UserLicense"
        )
        assert task.return_values == ["TEST1", "TEST2"]
```

And transform it into:

```python
    @pytest.mark.vcr()
    def test_license_preflight(self, create_task):
        task = create_task(GetAvailableLicenses, {})
        task()
        expected = set(["SFDC", "CLOUD_INTEGRATION_USER"])
        actual = set(task.return_values)
        assert not expected.difference(actual), task.return_values
```

> This meets all three of our core goals, and also will:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This meets all three of our core goals, and also does the following:
```

> a) run against real orgs, when requested to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Run against real orgs, when requested to
```

> b) run against pretend orgs, otherwise

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Run against pretend orgs, otherwise
```

> c) document the real-life behaviour of the task

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Document the real-life behavior of the task
```

> d) survive any reorganization of the internals of the task

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Survive any reorganization of the internals of the task
```

The ability to run against real orgs is an important
confidence-building measure when working with an environment

> that constantly changes like SAAS services.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that constantly changes, such as SAAS services.
```

> Using our testing infrastructure, you do so like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using our testing infrastructure, you run against a real org like this:
```

```s
$ pytest -k test_license_preflight --org qa
```

### How it Works

What happens under the cover is that the `create_task` fixture knows whether
the test suite is being run against a real org or not. If so, it passes
an `sf_org` object connected to a real Salesforce org. If not, it passes

> a fake `sf_org` which will emulate a `qa_org`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a fake `sf_org` which emulates a `qa_org`.
```

In a perfect world, we would achieve a very high level of test coverage

> when every fake/mock is turned "off" and all code is running against

Reviewer: ```suggestion
when every fake/mock is turned _off_ and all code is running against
```

> real systems, just as we have high coverage when they are ruened on.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
real systems, just as we have high coverage when they are turned on.
```

> real systems, just as we have high coverage when they are ruened on.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
real systems, just as we have high coverage when they are turned on.
```

The code paths which one might expect to be inaccessible in this mode are
code for handling errors, service outages, latency and high scale.

All other code should run against _real_ services or faked services
interchangably, depending on the current step in the SDLC.

### Component Tests

One of the goals is to test our system as real users use it, which is why
we use high-level APIs like `task()` instead of low level ones like

> `task._run_task()`

Reviewer 2: 💯

That said, a system as complicated as Cumulus Framework cannot be tested only

> from the _end_ user's perspective. Cumulus Framework consists of many components.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
from the end user's perspective. Cumulus Framework consists of many components.
```

> The "users" of these components are programmers on our team, and they should

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The users of these components are programmers on our team, and they should
```

be well-tested, just as if they were documented external APIs.

For example, the YAML merge algorithm is a component. The XML manipulator is
a component. The package XML library SHOULD BE a component, etc. These should
have test cases that ensure that their interfaces do not accidentally change.

## The Hard Cases: The Awkward Squad

> In the lingo of functional programmers, our tests doesn't deal with the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the lingo of functional programmers, our tests don't deal with the
```

"awkward squad" of issues other tests need to deal with:

> -   a variety of org shapes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   A variety of org shapes
```

> -   error/exception conditions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   Error/exception conditions
```

> -   mutable state (in the org)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   Mutable state (in the org)
```

> -   delays, timestamps and other temporal aspects

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   Delays, timestamps and other temporal aspects
```

"Old fashioned" data faking may be needed to deal with these. The rest
of this document outlines techninques for handling these hard cases.

### Org shapes

Cumulus Framework has testing infrastructure which can create custom
orgs for tests:

```
@pytest.mark.vcr()
@pytest.mark.org_shape("person_accounts", "config_person_accounts")
def test_some_person_account_feature(self):
    ...
```

> This will run the `config_person_accounts` flow against the `person_accounts`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This runs the `config_person_accounts` flow against the `person_accounts`
```

> org shape and run the test in the context of that org. At least that's

Reviewer: ```suggestion
org shape and runs the test in the context of that org. At least that's
```

the goal. This infrastructure has not been tested or used much yet (e.g. for
actual person accounts testing).

### Simulating Networking Errors with VCR

> It is possible to simulate networking errors by hand-editing VCR files.

Reviewer 3: I am not persuaded that this strategy is superior to mocking - actually I think there's a case for the reverse. Applying this strategy results in VCR artifacts being a mix of automatically-generated and handwritten, muddying the story around how they're updated. And if the hand-edited cassettes need to be updated, the hand-editing process has to be repeated.

Is there a clear way to avoid that issue? Otherwise, I'm inclined to say that we still need mocks in some cases.

> This pattern can be observed [here](https://github.com/SFDO-Tooling/CumulusCI/blob/35b07ebfa80170f6e0e9d8cabd3da75bf41d5d59/cumulusci/utils/salesforce/tests/test_count_sobjects.py#L23) and [here](https://github.com/SFDO-Tooling/CumulusCI/blob/e3ba7e8b542755b6395dbc895daee3d1ea3d11dc/cumulusci/utils/salesforce/tests/cassettes/ManualEdit_TestCountSObjects.test_count_sobjects__network_errors.yaml#L16).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This pattern can be observed in [test_count_sobjects.py](https://github.com/SFDO-Tooling/CumulusCI/blob/35b07ebfa80170f6e0e9d8cabd3da75bf41d5d59/cumulusci/utils/salesforce/tests/test_count_sobjects.py#L23) and [ManualEdit_TestCountSObjects.test_count_sobjects__network_errors.yaml](https://github.com/SFDO-Tooling/CumulusCI/blob/e3ba7e8b542755b6395dbc895daee3d1ea3d11dc/cumulusci/utils/salesforce/tests/cassettes/ManualEdit_TestCountSObjects.test_count_sobjects__network_errors.yaml#L16).
```

Reviewer: Not required, just nicer if people know where they're going. If there's a shorter way of expressing those links, that's fine too.

> ### Service Connectors

Reviewer 3: I love this section, but I think it's more future-looking than a currently applicable strategy. The fact is (sadly) that we don't wrap `simple_salesforce` or `github3` today, although we manifestly should. 

I think that a prospective contributor may be confused by this section, but it has great value for us in shaping future development.

Reviewer 3: n.b. I've written part of a wrapper abstracting over github3 and gitlab as an experiment that we could explore furthering.

Third party services (including Salesforce) should always be wrapped in Service Connector
abstractions.

These abstractions can be tested with Requests and VCR.

> The overall business logic can be tested by injecting fakes for Service Connectors.

Reviewer 3: This principle seems to me to be the highest level in this doc (subject to above notes). The decision tree looks like it runs:

- Are you using service connector model? 
  - If yes, test business logic with service connector fakes, no network access. Test service connector with VCR.
  - If no:
    - Prefer to test using VCR for anything that can be tested on an org shape that's reasonable to produce via automation
    - Test edge cases with mocking.

> A client library like simple_salesforce or github3 is not necessarily a good service

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A client library like `simple_salesforce` or `github3` is not necessarily a good service
```

connector abstraction, because they work at a protocol level and not a business logic
level. Two examples, from simple_salesforce:

> 1. We make heavy use of simple_salesforce.restful(), which tunnels MANY different types

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* We make heavy use of `simple_salesforce.restful()`, which tunnels MANY different types
```

   of requests through a single endpoint and is therefore hard to fake.

> 2. We make heavy use of simple_salesforce.query() which has the same problem.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* We make heavy use of `simple_salesforce.query()`, which has the same problem.
```

> Github3 is better, but arguably if we had started using it by wrapping it we'd be in a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`Github3` is better, but arguably if we had started using it by wrapping it we'd be in a
```

Reviewer: This whole paragraph seems like an explanation of implementation thought process. Do we need it? If so, it's a little hard to follow.

better position to add other VCS regardless, so maybe we should just always wrap

> client libraries by default. The case of Github3 is argably, but simple_salesforce

Reviewer: ```suggestion
client libraries by default. The case of `Github3` is arguably, but `simple_salesforce`
```

Reviewer: I'm not sure what this means. Above: `Github3` is better, maybe we should have wrapped it. Here: Github3 is ... arguably something? I don't know the difference you're calling out between these two libraries.

> client libraries by default. The case of Github3 is argably, but simple_salesforce

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
client libraries by default. The case of Github3 is arguable, but simple_salesforce
```

is not: the fact that we do all sorts of protocol-level things (passing URLs,

> fiddling headers) is a clear giveawaay that we should have wrapped it.

Reviewer: Should have wrapped which?

#### Wrap Universal Interfaces

> An abstraction like Salesforce.query() should be used for situations such as the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An abstraction like `Salesforce.query()` should be used for situations such as the
```

> end-user passing queries to us to execute. We, internally, should always wrap

Reviewer: I don't know the audience, but in case it's external, do we need to tell them what we wish we were doing internally?

it in a business-logic layer.

For example, instead of:

```python
sf_org.query("SELECT LicenseDefinitionKey FROM UserLicense")
```

There should be:

```
sf_org.get_user_licenses()
```

The latter can be faked much more easily and scalably. Imagine if you are testing
a large component which calls `sf_org.query()` six (or six hundred!) times. You'll
need to use string matching (which is intrinsically fragile) to figure out which
return values to return for which call.

Between the benefits of simpler tests, cleaner code and easier replacement of abstractions,

> ServiceConnectors will pay for themselves quickly.

Reviewer 3: These two sections seem like a very persuasive ADR in favor of using the Service Connector pattern.

## Summarized Do's and Don'ts

> 1. Use VCR when possible. Edit the VCR files if necessary to emulate networking failures.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Use VCR when possible. Edit the VCR files if necessary to emulate networking failures.
```

> 2. Mocking should only be used for replacing ServiceConnectors, not for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Use mocking only for replacing ServiceConnectors, not for
```

   replacing business logic code.

> 3. URLs, header manipulations, etc. should only occur in ServiceConnectors

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* URLs, header manipulations, etc. should only occur in ServiceConnectors
```

   and never business logic.

> 4. Tests should test user-visible logic OR component boundaries OR performance

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Tests should test user-visible logic OR component boundaries OR performance
```

   logic (e.g. caching) and never the control flow within algorithms.

> 5. Use "Universal Interfaces" like query languages and REST protocols only

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Use "Universal Interfaces" like query languages and REST protocols only
```

   a) in ServiceConnectors or b) when the Universal Interface has been exposed

>    to the end-user themselves, and therefore cannot be wrapped in business logic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   to the end-user and therefore can't be wrapped in business logic.
```

### Service Connectors

Third party services (including Salesforce) should always be wrapped in Service Connector
abstractions.

These abstractions can be tested with Requests and VCR.

The overall business logic can be tested by injecting fakes for Service Connectors.

A client library like `simple_salesforce` or `github3` is not necessarily a good service
connector abstraction, because they work at a protocol level and not a business logic
level. Two examples, from simple_salesforce:

* We make heavy use of `simple_salesforce.restful()`, which tunnels MANY different types
   of requests through a single endpoint and is therefore hard to fake.

* We make heavy use of `simple_salesforce.query()`, which has the same problem.

`Github3` is better, but arguably if we had started using it by wrapping it we'd be in a
better position to add other VCS regardless, so maybe we should just always wrap

> client libraries by default. The case of `Github3` is arguably, but `simple_salesforce`
> is not: the fact that we do all sorts of protocol-level things (passing URLs,

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
client libraries by default. The case of `Github3` is debatable, but `simple_salesforce`
is not: the fact that we do all sorts of protocol-level things (passing URLs,
```
